README.md, before:

# Recipebook

## Data Centric Development Milestone Project-3

## Description

The Recipebook is an online cookbook, where a user can find recipes or share his/her own recipes. User can create an account 
and has the possibility of add, update or delete his/her own recipes.

# UX

 The target audience of this web-application are food lovers who are either in search of good cooking recipes or they want to store 
 their favourite recipes online and want to share with the rest of the world. The purpose of this web-application 
 is to provide a platform to food lovers so they can share their cooking recipes with other. Besides this the web-application
 owner's goal is to create a cooking recipes database.

 ### User Stories

 1. As a user, I want to see a list / catalogue of recipes.
 2. As a user, I want to search for recipes so that I can find easily and quickly.
 3. As a user, I want to be able to create an account.
 4. As a user, I want to be able to login to my account.
 5. AS a user, I want to store/add  and share my recipes online with others.
 6. As a user, I want to see a list of my own recipes.
 7. As a user, I want to see the details of the recipe.
 8. As a user, I want to update my existing recipes. 
 9. As a user, I want to delete my existing recipes.
 10. As a user, I want to end the session.

 ## Design

 The website design is simple and responsive which allows the user to perform easily theCRUD functionality. The design 
 inspiration is taken from the **Code Institute's Task Manager Mini Project**.

#### Fonts

1. Google fonts **Krona One** is used in navbar and footer. 
2. Where as **Balsamiq Sans** is used in the body. 

#### Attribute

1. The target_blank value is given to the social links in the footer so that they will open in a new tab / window on click.
2. The required attribute is used in the **Search bar**, **Log In form**, **Sign Up form**, **Add Recipe form** and **Edit Recipe form** so that user 
fill in all the fiels before performing the respective action.

#### Hover Effect

1. Slight change in background color and default cursor changes to hand pointer happens when a user hover over a button.
2. Default cursor changes to hand pointer when a user hover over logo and social links.

## Wireframes

I used [Balsamiq](https://balsamiq.com/) to create wireframes which will provide an overview of how the website will look 
like on different mobile screen size.

- [Link to Wireframes](https://balsamiq.cloud/sfyoi6/p2i2t4h/r2278) 
- [Wireframes in PDF](static/wireframes/recipebook.pdf)

## Database Schema

NoSql MONGODB is used to store data at the backend. Database schema is designed for various collections before buiding the project. 
- [Collections Schema in PDF](static/collections/collections.pdf)

## Features
### Existing Features

- **Navbar/Side** navbar - Navbar and side navbar links vary, if user is logged in or not. If user is not logged in then Home,
All Recipes and Log In buttons are shown. Where as after login user can see Home, All Recipes, Add Recipes, My Recipes and Logout.
At login and signup pages all navbar/sidenavbar links will disappear except the logo Recipebook. 
- **All recipes** - When a user land on the home page and user has not logged in yet, user can see the list of all recipes in the database. User can also 
see the list of all recipes once the user has logged in.
- **Search** - User can search for any recipe in the database for being login or without login in the website.
- **Register** - User can easily register if does not have an account as signup form is very simple. Signup form
form has two fields username and password. It is required that a username must be minimum three character long and password 
should be minimum 6 character long. It is not possible to have two accounts with the same
name as I have included this feature to check whether the user name already exist or not. If username already exist then user will 
be notified that username already exist with a flash message.
- **Login** - If username password does not match user will get a message that invalid username/password.
- **Flash Messages** - Flash Messages are shown to the user to keep user inform of user interactivity. Flash messages for 
login and signup will stay untill pages is refreshed. Where as flash messages on recipe addition, deletion and update will 
disappear after 4 sec.
- **Logout** - Logout allows a user to end the session and return to the home page.
- **View** - It allows a user in session to see the details of a recipe.
- **Add Recipe** - It allows a user to add a new recipe in the database. All the fields are required in add recipe form. After 
adding the recipe user will get a flash message that recipe is added successfully and will disappear after 3 sec. After this 
user will be redirected to the all recipes page.
- **Edit/Delete Recipe** - When user is logged in user can edit or delete a recipe which he owns.
- **Edit/Delete Buttons**- Edit/Delete buttons will appear only if the user is the owner of that particular recipe.
- **Cancel Button** - Cancel button is provied in edit recipe page for user's convenience to cancel the operation which will 
redirect user back to that particular recipe that user was viewing.
- **Deletion Confirmation**- If a user click on delete button, then a modal will pop up to confirm if user is sure to delete the recipe or not.
- **My Recipe** - If user want to see his own added recipes then **My Recipe** function will  display the list of user's own recipe.

### Features Left to Implement

- **Pagination** - At the moment **All Recipes** and **My Recipes** pages just list all the recipes on the same page. But in 
in future I would like to add pagination so that a few number of recipes can be shown on the page and remain on page 2 or 
page 3 etc.
- **Graphs** - I would like add graphs in future to give a statistical overview of the recipes.
- **Reset Password** - A reset password feature will be added in the future.
- **Recover Password** - Password recovery feature if forgotten will also be added in future.
- **Recipe Image** - To make recipe visually appealing, recipe image addition option will also be added.
- **Sort** - Sorting recipes accending or decending order feature will also be added in future.

## Technologies Used

- **HTML5**
- **CSS3** - CSS3 is used for custome styling the elements. 
- **JavaScript** - JavaScript function is used to overcome the bug in the datepicker.
- **JQuery** - Jquery is used to initialize the Materialize components.
- **[Materialize Framework](https://materializecss.com/)** - Materialize front-end framework is used to make website responsive.
- **[Python](https://www.python.org/)** - Python is used as the back-end programming language.
- **[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/)** - Python microframework Flask is used to create this project.
- **[Jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/)** - Jinja templating language is used with Flask in the HTML code.
- **[Balsamiq](https://balsamiq.com/)** - Balsamiq is used to create wireframes for the project.
- **[PyMongo](https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)** -  It is a Python distribution that contains tools to work with MongoDB.
- **[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/)** - It is a NoSql database that is use to store data at the backend.
- **[Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/)** - Google fonts *Balsamiq Sans* and *Krona One* are used in the project.
- **[Git & Github](https://github.com/)** - Used for version control.
- **[Git & Github](https://www.heroku.com/#)** - It is used as hosting platform to deploy the project.

## Testing

Google developers tool has been used to test the project constantly form the  beginning to identify any error or to see 
how the changes looks like on different screen sizes. I created my on account and tested all the functions to make sure 
they work properly. In addition, I aslo asked my family, friends and slack community to test the project and give there feedback.

### User Stories
User stories from the UX section were tested to see if they all work as intended. 
- *As a user, I want to see a list / catalogue of recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **All Recipes** button in the navbar or on **All Recipes** beside image slider.
3. A list of recipes will be displayed.
- *As a user, I want to search for recipes so that I can find easily and quickly.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page
2. Go to the search bar beside the image slider and write any key word to search for the recipe.
3. Click on the **Search** button.
4. A list of recipes will be displayed.
5. If no recipe found then a **No Recipe Found** will be displayed.
- *As a user, I want to be able to create an account.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button AND then **Sign Up** button.
3. Fill in username, password and click on **Sign Up** button.
4. If username does not exist already then a user account will be created and user will be redirected to **Home** page.
5. If user already exist then user will get a message that **User already exists.**
- *As a user, I want to be able to login to my account.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and click on **Log In** button.
4. If username and password are correct then user will be redirected to the **Home** Page.
5. If username and password does not match then **Invalid username/password** message will be displayed.
- *AS a user, I want to store/add  and share my recipes online with others.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **Add Recipe** and fill out the **Add Recipe** form. All fields are required to fill in.
5.  Click on **Add Recipe** button. A confirmation message **Recipe successfully Added** will be displayed and user will 
be redirected to the list of all recipes.
- *As a user, I want to see a list of my own recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button.
5. User will be redirected to list of user's own recipes. 
- *As a user, I want to see the details of the recipe.*
1. Find the recipe either by using **Search bar** or from list **All Recipes** or from list of **My Recipes**.
2. Click on the **View** button.
3. Recipe details will be shown.
- *As a user, I want to update my existing recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button and choose the recipe form the list to update.(**User can only update or delete his own recipes**)
5. Click on the **View** button and the recipe details will be displayed.
6. Click on the **Edit** button and recipe details will open in a editable form.
7. Edit the required field and click on update. A conformation message **Recipe successfully updated** will be displayed.
8. If user want to cancel the update and return to the previous page then click on **Cancel** button.
- *As a user, I want to delete my existing recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button and choose the recipe form the list to update.(**User can only update or delete his own recipes**)
5. Click on the **View** button and the recipe details will be displayed.
6. Click on the **Delete** button and a pop up window will appear to confirm the deletion.
7. Click **yes** to confirm and a confirmation message **Recipe successfully deleted** will be displayed.
8. Click **No** to get back to same page agian.
- *As a user, I want to end the session.*
1. Click on the **Logout** button to end the session.

### Responsiveness on different browsers & Mobiles

The website looks fine and work properly on following web browsers and mobiles when tested on them.
- Google Chrome
- Microsoft Edge
- Firefox
- Opera 
- iPhone 6
- Huawei P30 lite

### Code Validation

The code has been validated by using;

- [W3C Markup Validation Service for HTML](https://validator.w3.org/)
- [W3C Markup Validation Service for CSS](https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)
- [Pep8 Online for Pyhton](http://pep8online.com/)

### Interesting Bugs / Issue

1. **Add Recipe function stopped working** - I encountered a very interesting bug when I made my datepicker filed a required 
field. I also wanted to show a feedback message to the user. To achieve this, I added a **JavaScript** function which I took from **Stack overflow**. 
But later I realized that **Add Recipe** function is not working. Since I used **Git** version control so I start going back to
the previous versions of my project to find out after which commit **Add Recipe** button stopped working. At last I found out
that its the **JavaScript** function that is causing this issue. So I replaced it with a **JQuery code** and solved this issue.
2. **Recepes can be stolen / Edited** - A very interesting bug that one of my friend **Elliot Redhead** point out was that a user can 
steal someone else's recipe and can edit / delete. Although edit / delete button are ment to display only to recipe owner.
Process of stealing recipe was;
- First view someone else's recipe and copy the recipe ID from the URL.
- Now open your own recipe in edit recipe page.
- Remove your recipe's ID and paste someone else's recipe ID.
- Press Enter now can edit someone els's recipe.
- **Solution** - To overcome this issue I need to update my edit recipe function. I put a check over there that will first see 
if the user who is trying to access the edit recipe page is the owner of the recipe. If **yes** then the function will let user
to proceed to edit recipe page else user will be redirected to the home page.
3. **No Recipe Found** - If a user in session does not have any own recipe then **No Recipe Found** message is displayed but
in the beginning this message has been also displayed in **All recipes**. To overcome this issue I need to amend my **Search Recipe**
function and **My Recipes** function togeather with if statement in recipes.html. Credit goes to Tim who helped me to fix this issue.
4. **Flash Messages** - Flash messages were not appearing after a delay of few seconds on **Adding Recipe**, **Updating Recipe**
and **Deleting Recipe** I realized later that, I need to hide it first then delay and it worked.
5. **Carousel** - I found out that if user keep click on or on touch screen keep pressing the **Carousel (Image Slider)**
then the images starts flashing. I did not tried to fix it and it remains there.

## Deployment to Heroku

- **[Recipebook Live Page](http://mss-recipebook.herokuapp.com/index_recipe)**

- **[Recipebook Github Repository](https://github.com/sohailshams/cookbook)**

1. Login to **[Heroko](https://www.heroku.com/)** account.
2. Click on **New** at the right top corner and click on **Create new app**.
3. Choose **App name** and a **region**. Then click on **Create app**.
4. Go to terminal window and create **requirements.txt** by running command **pip3 freeze --local > requirements.txt**
5. Then create **Procfile** by running command **echo web: python app.py > Procfile** **Remember P is capital**
6. Add these files to stagging area by running command **git add requirements.txt** & **git add Procfile**.
7. Then commit these file respectively by running command **git commit -m "Added requirements.txt** & **git commit -m "Added Procfile**.
8. Then push these files to **github** by running command **git push**
9. Go back to **Heroku** to your **App** and click on **Deploy** tab. 
10. Then go to **Deployment Method** and click on **Github Connect to Github**.
11. Then make sure your **Github Profile** is displayed and add you **repository name** and click on **Search**.
12. Once it find your repository then click on **Connect**.
13. Now go to **Settings** at the top. Then click on **Reveal Config Vars**.
14. In **Config Vars** add **IP** with value **0.0.0.0** then add **PORT** as **5000** then add **SECRET_KEY** then add **MONGO_URI** and then add **MONGO_DBNAME** which is the name of database.
15. Now go back to **Deploy** tab and click on **Enable Automatic Deploys**.
16. Now click on **Deploy Branch**
17. It will take a minute and display a message that **Your app was successfully deployed**.
18. Click on **View** to launch your deployed app.

## Local Deployment

1. Go to [Recipebook Github Repository](https://github.com/sohailshams/cookbook)
2. Click on **Code** beside **Gitpod**. 
3. A drop down menu open then click on **Download Zip**
4. Unzip the downloaded zip file.
5. Open app.py file and install requirements.txt by running comman **pip3 install -r requirements.txt**.
6. Create a database in **MONGODB** following this scheme - [Collections Schema in PDF](static/collections/collections.pdf)
7. Create env.py file and add **MONGO_URI** and **SECRET_KEY**. 
8. Now run the app by running code **python3 app.py**

## Credits
### Content

- Cheese Cake recipe has been taken from  [Joy of Baking](https://www.joyofbaking.com/)

### Media

- The pictures in the Carousel(image slider) been taken from [Google](https://www.google.com/)

### Acknowledgements
1. Code Institute's **Task Manager Application** was great source of inspiration. I follow it to design and develop my **Recipebook** website.
2. Code for **Login System** is taken from [Pretty Printed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vVx1737auSE)
3. Code Institute's tutor support has been a great help during the whole project, a very special thanks to tutor support team, specially Tim.
4. The project is based on **Materialize**, so the code is taken from [Materialize](https://materializecss.com/)
4. A special thanks to my mentor **Ashish Srivastava** for his valuable feedback during mentoring sessions. 
5. Besides tutor support [Stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/) was great source of help.
6. I would like thank my lovely wife, my sons Ibrahim and Ismail for their support and motivation.
7. I would like to thank **Elliot Redhead** for his valuable feedback and help.

## Disclaimer
This project is for educational purposes only.

Commit message:

Updated technologies used and acknowledgements

README.md, after:

# Recipebook

## Data Centric Development Milestone Project-3

## Description

The Recipebook is an online cookbook, where a user can find recipes or share his/her own recipes. User can create an account 
and has the possibility of add, update or delete his/her own recipes.

# UX

 The target audience of this web-application are food lovers who are either in search of good cooking recipes or they want to store 
 their favourite recipes online and want to share with the rest of the world. The purpose of this web-application 
 is to provide a platform to food lovers so they can share their cooking recipes with other. Besides this the web-application
 owner's goal is to create a cooking recipes database.

 ### User Stories

 1. As a user, I want to see a list / catalogue of recipes.
 2. As a user, I want to search for recipes so that I can find easily and quickly.
 3. As a user, I want to be able to create an account.
 4. As a user, I want to be able to login to my account.
 5. AS a user, I want to store/add  and share my recipes online with others.
 6. As a user, I want to see a list of my own recipes.
 7. As a user, I want to see the details of the recipe.
 8. As a user, I want to update my existing recipes. 
 9. As a user, I want to delete my existing recipes.
 10. As a user, I want to end the session.

 ## Design

 The website design is simple and responsive which allows the user to perform easily theCRUD functionality. The design 
 inspiration is taken from the **Code Institute's Task Manager Mini Project**.

#### Fonts

1. Google fonts **Krona One** is used in navbar and footer. 
2. Where as **Balsamiq Sans** is used in the body. 

#### Attribute

1. The target_blank value is given to the social links in the footer so that they will open in a new tab / window on click.
2. The required attribute is used in the **Search bar**, **Log In form**, **Sign Up form**, **Add Recipe form** and **Edit Recipe form** so that user 
fill in all the fiels before performing the respective action.

#### Hover Effect

1. Slight change in background color and default cursor changes to hand pointer happens when a user hover over a button.
2. Default cursor changes to hand pointer when a user hover over logo and social links.

## Wireframes

I used [Balsamiq](https://balsamiq.com/) to create wireframes which will provide an overview of how the website will look 
like on different mobile screen size.

- [Link to Wireframes](https://balsamiq.cloud/sfyoi6/p2i2t4h/r2278) 
- [Wireframes in PDF](static/wireframes/recipebook.pdf)

## Database Schema

NoSql MONGODB is used to store data at the backend. Database schema is designed for various collections before buiding the project. 
- [Collections Schema in PDF](static/collections/collections.pdf)

## Features
### Existing Features

- **Navbar/Side** navbar - Navbar and side navbar links vary, if user is logged in or not. If user is not logged in then Home,
All Recipes and Log In buttons are shown. Where as after login user can see Home, All Recipes, Add Recipes, My Recipes and Logout.
At login and signup pages all navbar/sidenavbar links will disappear except the logo Recipebook. 
- **All recipes** - When a user land on the home page and user has not logged in yet, user can see the list of all recipes in the database. User can also 
see the list of all recipes once the user has logged in.
- **Search** - User can search for any recipe in the database for being login or without login in the website.
- **Register** - User can easily register if does not have an account as signup form is very simple. Signup form
form has two fields username and password. It is required that a username must be minimum three character long and password 
should be minimum 6 character long. It is not possible to have two accounts with the same
name as I have included this feature to check whether the user name already exist or not. If username already exist then user will 
be notified that username already exist with a flash message.
- **Login** - If username password does not match user will get a message that invalid username/password.
- **Flash Messages** - Flash Messages are shown to the user to keep user inform of user interactivity. Flash messages for 
login and signup will stay untill pages is refreshed. Where as flash messages on recipe addition, deletion and update will 
disappear after 4 sec.
- **Logout** - Logout allows a user to end the session and return to the home page.
- **View** - It allows a user in session to see the details of a recipe.
- **Add Recipe** - It allows a user to add a new recipe in the database. All the fields are required in add recipe form. After 
adding the recipe user will get a flash message that recipe is added successfully and will disappear after 3 sec. After this 
user will be redirected to the all recipes page.
- **Edit/Delete Recipe** - When user is logged in user can edit or delete a recipe which he owns.
- **Edit/Delete Buttons**- Edit/Delete buttons will appear only if the user is the owner of that particular recipe.
- **Cancel Button** - Cancel button is provied in edit recipe page for user's convenience to cancel the operation which will 
redirect user back to that particular recipe that user was viewing.
- **Deletion Confirmation**- If a user click on delete button, then a modal will pop up to confirm if user is sure to delete the recipe or not.
- **My Recipe** - If user want to see his own added recipes then **My Recipe** function will  display the list of user's own recipe.

### Features Left to Implement

- **Pagination** - At the moment **All Recipes** and **My Recipes** pages just list all the recipes on the same page. But in 
in future I would like to add pagination so that a few number of recipes can be shown on the page and remain on page 2 or 
page 3 etc.
- **Graphs** - I would like add graphs in future to give a statistical overview of the recipes.
- **Reset Password** - A reset password feature will be added in the future.
- **Recover Password** - Password recovery feature if forgotten will also be added in future.
- **Recipe Image** - To make recipe visually appealing, recipe image addition option will also be added.
- **Sort** - Sorting recipes accending or decending order feature will also be added in future.

## Technologies Used

- **HTML5**
- **CSS3** - CSS3 is used for custome styling the elements. 
- **JavaScript** - JavaScript function is used to overcome the bug in the datepicker.
- **JQuery** - Jquery is used to initialize the Materialize components.
- **[Materialize Framework](https://materializecss.com/)** - Materialize front-end framework is used to make website responsive.
- **[Python](https://www.python.org/)** - Python is used as the back-end programming language.
- **[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/)** - Python microframework Flask is used to create this project.
- **[Jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.11.x/)** - Jinja templating language is used with Flask in the HTML code.
- **[Balsamiq](https://balsamiq.com/)** - Balsamiq is used to create wireframes for the project.
- **[PyMongo](https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)** -  It is a Python distribution that contains tools to work with MongoDB.
- **[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/)** - It is a NoSql database that is use to store data at the backend.
- **[Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/)** - Google fonts *Balsamiq Sans* and *Krona One* are used in the project.
- **[Git & Github](https://github.com/)** - Used for version control.
- **[Git & Github](https://www.heroku.com/#)** - It is used as hosting platform to deploy the project.
- **[HTML Formatter](https://webformatter.com/html)** - Used to format and beautify my code.


## Testing

Google developers tool has been used to test the project constantly form the  beginning to identify any error or to see 
how the changes looks like on different screen sizes. I created my on account and tested all the functions to make sure 
they work properly. In addition, I aslo asked my family, friends and slack community to test the project and give there feedback.

### User Stories
User stories from the UX section were tested to see if they all work as intended. 
- *As a user, I want to see a list / catalogue of recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **All Recipes** button in the navbar or on **All Recipes** beside image slider.
3. A list of recipes will be displayed.
- *As a user, I want to search for recipes so that I can find easily and quickly.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page
2. Go to the search bar beside the image slider and write any key word to search for the recipe.
3. Click on the **Search** button.
4. A list of recipes will be displayed.
5. If no recipe found then a **No Recipe Found** will be displayed.
- *As a user, I want to be able to create an account.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button AND then **Sign Up** button.
3. Fill in username, password and click on **Sign Up** button.
4. If username does not exist already then a user account will be created and user will be redirected to **Home** page.
5. If user already exist then user will get a message that **User already exists.**
- *As a user, I want to be able to login to my account.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and click on **Log In** button.
4. If username and password are correct then user will be redirected to the **Home** Page.
5. If username and password does not match then **Invalid username/password** message will be displayed.
- *AS a user, I want to store/add  and share my recipes online with others.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **Add Recipe** and fill out the **Add Recipe** form. All fields are required to fill in.
5.  Click on **Add Recipe** button. A confirmation message **Recipe successfully Added** will be displayed and user will 
be redirected to the list of all recipes.
- *As a user, I want to see a list of my own recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button.
5. User will be redirected to list of user's own recipes. 
- *As a user, I want to see the details of the recipe.*
1. Find the recipe either by using **Search bar** or from list **All Recipes** or from list of **My Recipes**.
2. Click on the **View** button.
3. Recipe details will be shown.
- *As a user, I want to update my existing recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button and choose the recipe form the list to update.(**User can only update or delete his own recipes**)
5. Click on the **View** button and the recipe details will be displayed.
6. Click on the **Edit** button and recipe details will open in a editable form.
7. Edit the required field and click on update. A conformation message **Recipe successfully updated** will be displayed.
8. If user want to cancel the update and return to the previous page then click on **Cancel** button.
- *As a user, I want to delete my existing recipes.*
1. Go to the **Home** Page.
2. Click on **log In** button.
3. Fill in username, password and **Log In**.
4. Click on **My Recipes** button and choose the recipe form the list to update.(**User can only update or delete his own recipes**)
5. Click on the **View** button and the recipe details will be displayed.
6. Click on the **Delete** button and a pop up window will appear to confirm the deletion.
7. Click **yes** to confirm and a confirmation message **Recipe successfully deleted** will be displayed.
8. Click **No** to get back to same page agian.
- *As a user, I want to end the session.*
1. Click on the **Logout** button to end the session.

### Responsiveness on different browsers & Mobiles

The website looks fine and work properly on following web browsers and mobiles when tested on them.
- Google Chrome
- Microsoft Edge
- Firefox
- Opera 
- iPhone 6
- Huawei P30 lite

### Code Validation

The code has been validated by using;

- [W3C Markup Validation Service for HTML](https://validator.w3.org/)
- [W3C Markup Validation Service for CSS](https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)
- [Pep8 Online for Pyhton](http://pep8online.com/)

### Interesting Bugs / Issue

1. **Add Recipe function stopped working** - I encountered a very interesting bug when I made my datepicker filed a required 
field. I also wanted to show a feedback message to the user. To achieve this, I added a **JavaScript** function which I took from **Stack overflow**. 
But later I realized that **Add Recipe** function is not working. Since I used **Git** version control so I start going back to
the previous versions of my project to find out after which commit **Add Recipe** button stopped working. At last I found out
that its the **JavaScript** function that is causing this issue. So I replaced it with a **JQuery code** and solved this issue.
2. **Recepes can be stolen / Edited** - A very interesting bug that one of my friend **Elliot Redhead** point out was that a user can 
steal someone else's recipe and can edit / delete. Although edit / delete button are ment to display only to recipe owner.
Process of stealing recipe was;
- First view someone else's recipe and copy the recipe ID from the URL.
- Now open your own recipe in edit recipe page.
- Remove your recipe's ID and paste someone else's recipe ID.
- Press Enter now can edit someone els's recipe.
- **Solution** - To overcome this issue I need to update my edit recipe function. I put a check over there that will first see 
if the user who is trying to access the edit recipe page is the owner of the recipe. If **yes** then the function will let user
to proceed to edit recipe page else user will be redirected to the home page.
3. **No Recipe Found** - If a user in session does not have any own recipe then **No Recipe Found** message is displayed but
in the beginning this message has been also displayed in **All recipes**. To overcome this issue I need to amend my **Search Recipe**
function and **My Recipes** function togeather with if statement in recipes.html. Credit goes to Tim who helped me to fix this issue.
4. **Flash Messages** - Flash messages were not appearing after a delay of few seconds on **Adding Recipe**, **Updating Recipe**
and **Deleting Recipe** I realized later that, I need to hide it first then delay and it worked.
5. **Carousel** - I found out that if user keep click on or on touch screen keep pressing the **Carousel (Image Slider)**
then the images starts flashing. I did not tried to fix it and it remains there.

## Deployment to Heroku

- **[Recipebook Live Page](http://mss-recipebook.herokuapp.com/index_recipe)**

- **[Recipebook Github Repository](https://github.com/sohailshams/cookbook)**

1. Login to **[Heroko](https://www.heroku.com/)** account.
2. Click on **New** at the right top corner and click on **Create new app**.
3. Choose **App name** and a **region**. Then click on **Create app**.
4. Go to terminal window and create **requirements.txt** by running command **pip3 freeze --local > requirements.txt**
5. Then create **Procfile** by running command **echo web: python app.py > Procfile** **Remember P is capital**
6. Add these files to stagging area by running command **git add requirements.txt** & **git add Procfile**.
7. Then commit these file respectively by running command **git commit -m "Added requirements.txt** & **git commit -m "Added Procfile**.
8. Then push these files to **github** by running command **git push**
9. Go back to **Heroku** to your **App** and click on **Deploy** tab. 
10. Then go to **Deployment Method** and click on **Github Connect to Github**.
11. Then make sure your **Github Profile** is displayed and add you **repository name** and click on **Search**.
12. Once it find your repository then click on **Connect**.
13. Now go to **Settings** at the top. Then click on **Reveal Config Vars**.
14. In **Config Vars** add **IP** with value **0.0.0.0** then add **PORT** as **5000** then add **SECRET_KEY** then add **MONGO_URI** and then add **MONGO_DBNAME** which is the name of database.
15. Now go back to **Deploy** tab and click on **Enable Automatic Deploys**.
16. Now click on **Deploy Branch**
17. It will take a minute and display a message that **Your app was successfully deployed**.
18. Click on **View** to launch your deployed app.

## Local Deployment

1. Go to [Recipebook Github Repository](https://github.com/sohailshams/cookbook)
2. Click on **Code** beside **Gitpod**. 
3. A drop down menu open then click on **Download Zip**
4. Unzip the downloaded zip file.
5. Open app.py file and install requirements.txt by running comman **pip3 install -r requirements.txt**.
6. Create a database in **MONGODB** following this scheme - [Collections Schema in PDF](static/collections/collections.pdf)
7. Create env.py file and add **MONGO_URI** and **SECRET_KEY**. 
8. Now run the app by running code **python3 app.py**

## Credits
### Content

- Cheese Cake recipe has been taken from  [Joy of Baking](https://www.joyofbaking.com/)

### Media

- The pictures in the Carousel(image slider) been taken from [Google](https://www.google.com/)

### Acknowledgements
1. Code Institute's **Task Manager Application** was great source of inspiration. I follow it to design and develop my **Recipebook** website.
2. Code for **Login System** is taken from [Pretty Printed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vVx1737auSE)
3. Code Institute's tutor support has been a great help during the whole project, a very special thanks to tutor support team, specially Tim.
4. The project is based on **Materialize**, so the code is taken from [Materialize](https://materializecss.com/)
4. A special thanks to my mentor **Ashish Srivastava** for his valuable feedback during mentoring sessions. 
5. Besides tutor support [Stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/) was great source of help.
6. I would like thank my lovely wife, my sons Ibrahim and Ismail for their support and motivation.
7. I would like to thank **Elliot Redhead** for his valuable feedback and help.
8. [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/)

## Disclaimer
This project is for educational purposes only.
